Abstract
Human-centered design expands the context and reach of the work of technical
communicators and provides an opportunity to investigate and advocate for the
needs of vulnerable populations. This article summarizes and contributes to the
conversation about social justice occurring in both technical communication and
design. Using a variety of qualitative methods as a type of design ethnography, this
article shares findings from a study that investigated the experiences of homeless bus
riders. The study findings provide an opportunity to examine the design of informa-
tion and communication technologies and changes to policies that impact vulnerable
populations. The article discusses the implications of an advocacy perspective for
technical communicators practicing human-centered design and their role and
opportunity to bring about socially responsible design.
Keywords
human-centered design, vulnerable populations, resource-constraints
Introduction
Technologies are becoming more ubiquitous and embedded in our daily lives
and are increasingly incorporated into all types of services and systems in our
surroundings, communities, and governments. The digitization of daily life
Journal of Technical Writing and
Communication
2016, Vol. 46(4) 427–445
!The Author(s) 2016
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0047281616653494
jtw.sagepub.com
1University of Washington Tacoma, Tacoma, WA, USA
Corresponding Author:
Emma J. Rose, University of Washington Tacoma, Tacoma, WA 98402, USA.
Email: ejrose@uw.edu
provides an opportunity to ask questions such as how is the world being designed,
who is doing the designing, and what is the impact? For example, the move to
e-government can improve transparency, public engagement, and participation
and also increase access to government services. However, these opportunities
also come with challenges. The move to digital services makes assumptions
about people’s digital literacies and access to the Internet and technology.
Looking at the resulting designs, we must ask, Who, either by intention or by
design, is being left out? It is within this space that I am positioning this article.
I propose that a social justice perspective in technical communication and
human-centered design can reveal the ways that technologies embed existing
inequities into their designs and risk further disenfranchising already vulnerable
populations.
Human-centered design is an approach that focuses on the needs, contexts,
desires, and input of the people who are the audience, or users, of the design.
The choice of the term human-centered design, instead of the more traditional
user-centered design, is intentional and moves away from the idea that we are
focusing on people solely in their relationship to and use of technology. Gasson
(2003) claims that a user-centered approach is inherently more technology
focused, whereas a human-centered approach takes a sociotechnical view and
strives to balance the two (sometimes) contradictory systems: the first being the
social system of human activities informed by goals, knowledge, organizational
context, and culture-specific practices and the second being the technical systems
that are rule-based, formal, and measurable. Therefore, human-centered design
represents a broader conceptualization in regards to the design of information
and technologies. It is not enough to include users in the design process or to
focus solely on efficiency as a system value. Instead, human-centered design
should look more broadly and provide a way to consider how design can sup-
port or constrain the needs of people whose lives are impacted by both the
systems and policies that are created by a more digitized world.
Human-centered design provides an approach that can both inform design
and offer a critique to examine larger structural issues. My goal in this article is
to consider how we as technical communicators and designers can contribute
carefully and ethically to projects that advocate for solutions that promote and
value equity. First, I provide a brief overview of the growing interest in social
justice concerns in the fields of technical communication and design. Second,
I situate this discussion by defining the concept of resource-constrained contexts
and showing how the examination of constraints provides an opportunity to
consider tensions between people’s needs and system designs. Third, I present a
selection of findings from a study that examined the resource-constraints of
transportation and housing. Fourth, I use the study findings to ground a critique
of the design and policies deployed in a public transportation’s informational
ecosystem. Finally, I conclude by discussing the implications of an advocacy
perspective for technical communicators practicing human-centered design.
428 Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 46(4)
Social Justice and Responsibility in Technical
Communication and Design
In this section, I present examples of social justice concerns in the technical
communication and design literature. My research, like that of many others,
crosses the porous boundaries between the two fields. By providing examples
from both, my aim is to highlight connections and similarities. Historically, both
fields focused on the genres, technologies, and practices that people engage in
while “at work.” As technologies move beyond the workplace, we must continue
to expand our research to include a variety of contexts, activities, and spaces and
to understand and collaborate with the people who occupy these spaces.
Technical Communication
Within technical communication, the space between users and writers is shrink-
ing. As Salvo (2001) states, this shift in user-centered design that employs rhet-
orical methodology moves from an “observation of users to participation with
users” (p. 273). With this shift comes increasing acknowledgment of the ethical
responsibility that we, as technical communicators, have as researchers. Salvo
argues persuasively for developing and deploying dialogic ethics in user-centered
design research. As Salvo writes, “when one engages another person as an indi-
vidual, as a person, one recognizes the humanity of the other” (p. 276). Salvo
argues that dialogical ethics are critical to researchers, because they help us avoid
the deployment of usability practices that are motivated solely by commercial
interests and that focus on efficiency above all else. Dialogical ethics require us to
be with the user in their discomfort and frustration. Salvo argues that these
responsibilities are both pedagogical and rhetorical. We engage with users not
only to learn from them but also to be able to communicate their discomfort back
to technology designers, developers, and organizations (Salvo, 2001).
When we take into account a social-justice perspective, we can consider how
ethical responsibilities extend beyond the relationships between users, research-
ers, and developers. Social justice may also ask us to consider whom it is we
speak of when we speak of users. Whose discomfort are we bearing witness to?
Who can alleviate this discomfort? Looking further to marginalized, vulnerable,
and potentially ignored groups can compel us to develop a more complex under-
standing of users. Also, when we talk about making the discomfort of users
present and felt, who should be the recipient of that discomfort? Is it solely
the individuals and the organizations who design technologies? Or should we
look beyond the technologists to policy and decision makers?
In addition to the need to consider our ethical positioning in relation to users
and stakeholders, the field of technical communication is also embracing the
expanding contexts and increasing complexities of the arenas in which our work
takes place. Walton and Jones (2013) articulate that context is a central factor in
Rose 429
social justice work, particularly because of the complexity of connections across
cultures, disciplines, and organizations. These expanding contexts are demon-
strated by genre ecologies; the relationships between race, rhetoric, and technol-
ogy; and post-human rhetorics.
Spinuzzi and Zachry’s (2000) framework of genre ecologies provides a
helpful guide for considering design because it focuses our attention on the
ways that people are coordinating resources, such as documents, genres, and
technologies, to achieve their goals. Situated as a sociocultural approach,
genre ecologies acknowledge that systems are open, rather than closed, and are
informed by contingency, decentralization, and relative stability. Investigating
these three characteristics in relation to social practices, both individual and com-
munal, can provide insight into use and design (Spinuzzi & Zachry, 2000).
When examining the intersections between race, rhetoric, technology, and
technical communication, Haas (2012) argues that, as our contexts expand, we
are reminded “that all our users are not reflections of ourselves” (p.281). For
technical communication scholars, the social justice project is necessary, not
only to examine more diverse spaces, cultures, and needs but also to consider
self-reflexively how our own training and perspectives may intentionally recreate
the status quo, or blind us to a more critical stance. As she states:
Even in the most progressive spaces and places, the colonial rhetorical detritus of
racism and ethnocentrism remains, and if these worldviews and rhetorics go
unchallenged, they will continue to influence who and what we think of when we
consider issues of race and technological literacy and expertise (p. 287).
My hope is to continue to problematize some of these issues in the findings section
by examining the notion of expertise and who we regard as experts.
Mara and Hawk (2009) consider that the field has always been post-human,
because of its inclination to see the writer and the product of the writer’s work as
situated in larger contexts, be they organizational, institutional, or techno-
logical. A post-human perspective also positions the technical communicator
within a larger societal context and, within that context, acknowledges the
inequities, both structural and circumstantial, that are embedded in this broader
context. We exist in that inequitable context as do the readers, users, and audi-
ences who are the focus of what we produce. Acknowledging and examining
these contexts, as this article does, provide a broader sense of what is within our
realm of inquiry.
In addition to a wider variety of diversity in terms of contexts and people, the
field of technical communication has historically considered the creation of
policy in addition to technologies and systems. This space of policy creation is
directly tied to a social justice project due to its ability to codify regulations for
communities. In their work on public deliberation, Simmons and Grabill (2007)
acknowledge that indirect exclusion is the norm. Most community members lack
430 Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 46(4)
the expertise or understanding of social norms and deliberative practices needed
to enter immediately into a conversation related to policy making. Is it then
possible or desirable for technical communicators to move into these roles to
mitigate exclusion? Are there ways our methods can go beyond the current
methods being used and bring to light the complexities of public policy deci-
sions? In Grabill’s (2009) work on HIV/AIDS policy work, he articulates a clear
activist stance for researchers in professional writing in order to consider how
our work can bring about policy change. He asks:
Would policy look different if those most silent were suddenly active? Would policy
look different if greater numbers of clients could participate? Probably. This is the
problem of client involvement, then: how to improve or change the processes of
involvement so that greater numbers and varieties of people can participate in
making public policy. (p. 31)
He goes further to say that, although an activist stance does not just facilitate
public input into the process, it can actually bring about changes to the processes
themselves and, further, to ways in which policies are made.
With the change in focus, the broadening of scope, and the interest in taking
an activist stance in our research, technical communication scholars have
deployed a wide array of research methods to understand the contexts related
to social justice. As Grabill (2009) asks, “we always ‘take sides’ in our research
(even in the most mundane ways), so how do we do this in ways which are
ethically and politically sound (or at least justifiable)” (p. 33)? Blythe, Grabill,
and Riley (2008) use critical action research in their study that engaged a local
community-based project related to contaminated waste. As they state, action
research with a commitment to social justice “requires intervention, not simply
description” (Blythe et al., 2008, p. 2). In his call for decolonialized methodol-
ogies in intercultural technical communication research practices, Agboka
(2014) articulates the need for technical communication researchers to develop
approaches that are “cognizant of local logics, rhetorics, histories, philosophies
and politics” (p. 298). While he focuses primarily on contexts of international
technical communication research, I argue that researchers can and should apply
these approaches to resource-constrained populations in developed countries in
order to pursue research related to social justice.
Design Within Human–Computer Interaction
As scholars of technical communication continue to explore expanded contexts
and methods that examine issues related to social justice, we see a parallel in the
design literature of human-computer interaction. Buchanan (2001), while reflect-
ing on what he refers to as “new design thinking,” represented by the shift to
human-centered design is “not a rejection of function, but a recognition that
Rose 431
unless designers grasp the significant content of the product they create, their
work will come to little consequence or may even lead to harm in our complex
world” (p. 35). This idea suggests that designers have a responsibility and obli-
gation to account for the ways in which their work can impact people. He goes
on to define human-centered design in a way that elaborates and expands its
meaning and, to this author, makes the shift from user, use, and activity to
humans being at the center of the design process
Human-centered design is fundamentally an affirmation of human dignity. It is an
ongoing search for what can be done to support and strengthen the dignity of
human beings as they act out their lives in varied social, economic, political and
cultural circumstances. (p. 37)
Building on Buchanan’s work, Caruso and Frankel (2010) argue that the role of
the designer has shifted and expanded. Design has moved from being interested
in purely aesthetic concerns to the need to account for a diverse and complex
world that often looks very different from a designers’ experience and reality.
Caruso and Frankel invoke the construct of wicked problems to help with this
dilemma. Wicked problems are ones that are constantly shifting, contextual,
social, and not easily solved. In their characterization of wicked problems and
why a systems based approach is not adequate to address them, Rittel and
Webber (1973) state, “one cannot understand the problem without knowing
about its context; one cannot meaningfully search for information without the
orientation of a solution concept; one cannot first understand, then solve”
(p. 162). While within a design process, we often demarcate specific phases of
solving the problem, a linear path from problem to solution does not exist in
wicked problems. Wicked problems exist throughout domains in the social
realm, such as education, healthcare, poverty, and public planning. Because
these problems represent a series of interlocking issues, they must be investigated
as design problems through interdisciplinary practice.
Caruso and Frankel find direction for designing wicked problems from a
social model of design practice. A social model of design practice is derived
from an ecological perspective, inspired by the practice of social work, and
privileges the satisfaction of human needs (Margolin & Margolin, 2002). The
ecological perspective is enacted by examining the people and organizations
within a system—individuals, families, groups, and communities—but also
the domains within the environment, including cultural, social, physical,
and so forth. This parallels technical communications’ interest in post-humanism
(Mara & Hawk, 2009) and the framework of genre ecologies (Spinuzzi &
Zachry, 2000). A more holistic view of design requires that designers engage
in participant observation and become embedded within the context to generate
a deeper understanding of the design challenges. For example, in a social model
of design practice, working alongside the helping professions and exploring their
432 Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 46(4)
methods provides insights into the complexities related to socially embedded
problems of a particular site in order to generate impactful design solutions.
Another significant shift to the broader context and impact of design is found
in the practice of value sensitive design (VSD), defined as a “theoretically
grounded approach to the design of technology that accounts for human values
in a principled and comprehensive manner throughout the design process”
(Friedman, Kahn Jr., & Borning, 2006, p. 349). VSD focuses on the human
values of direct and indirect stakeholders in order to bring about a design that
is sensitive and accounts for those values. VSD consists of a tripartite method-
ology investigating conceptual, empirical, and technical angles. A VSD engage-
ment can start with one of these areas and is an iterative process in which each
phase can be revisited. The conceptual phase asks, Who are the direct and indirect
stakeholders, how will they be affected by design, and what values are implicated?
The empirical stage investigates the human context in which the technical artifact
is situated. It applies to any activity that can be observed or measured and uses a
range of quantitative and qualitative methodologies. The technical phase inves-
tigates the technologies in the face of identified values: As Friedman et al. (2006)
state, a “given technology is more suitable for certain activities and more readily
supports certain values while rendering ”other activities and values more difficult
to realize” (p. 73). By ensuring that values are at the center of the design process,
considerations for design extend beyond the immediate users to include those who
may be indirectly impacted by a technology; therefore, VSD broadens the scope of
questions that we as designers must contend with.
In both technical communication and design, we see an acknowledgement of
the responsibilities of the researcher, writer, and designer. We also see how the
expanding context of design spaces requires broader research approaches and
reflection. In the next section, I explore the idea of resource-constrained contexts
and provide details about a study that investigated the needs of a group of
people who had limited access to housing and transportation.
Understanding the Experience of Homeless Bus Riders
In my work, I use the term resource-constrained contexts, which includes both
developing countries and vulnerable or underserved populations in developed
countries. A resource-constrained environment, in this formulation, is any
context with limited access to, or reduced availability of, resources.
Resources include physical as well as social infrastructure and range from
robust bandwidth to electricity to literacy. Examining constraints provides an
opportunity to examine tensions that occur between human intentions, actions,
and needs and the systems, resources, and technologies that mediate our worlds.
To illustrate how resource constraints impact use, I present research related
to the constraints of transportation and housing. The next section provides a
subset of findings from a larger study examining the experience of people who
Rose 433
rely on public transportation. These findings focus on particularly vulnerable
participants in the study, who had limited access to stable housing.
Transportation is a key resource because it acts as a conduit to other resources:
Without reliable transportation, it is difficult, if not impossible, to access
resources such as employment and healthcare, or to maintain and create
social connections. Additionally, people who are homeless, whether temporarily
or for long stretches of time, face a variety of challenges that impact all aspects
of their lives, especially their physical and mental well-being.
In the design literature, a variety of studies have focused on the needs of home-
less populations. Le Dantec and Edwards (2008) investigated the needs of a group
of homeless people in order to identify design considerations and appropriate
technology solutions. Their research highlighted the ways in which homeless
people needed and accessed information and also identified the important role
that the mobile phone plays in maintaining social connections with family and
friends. Additional studies by Woelfer, Hendry, and colleagues looked specifically
at homeless youth and identified the important roles that technologies, including
mobile phones and social networking sites, play in both creating and maintaining
social networks and expressing identities both on and offline (Woelfer & Hendry,
2010a, 2010b; Woelfer, Iverson, Hendry, Friedman, & Gill, 2011).
Methods
The primary aim of my research was to investigate how people experience and
overcome challenges in their daily lives—specifically, challenges related to trans-
portation. The goal was to generate ideas that could inform the design of infor-
mation technologies. Accordingly, I designed a study that uses a variety of
qualitative methods as a type of design ethnography (Salvador, Bell, &
Anderson, 1999). Design ethnography creates the opportunity to understand
the cultural and social context of everyday life to provide examples and rich
descriptions that can inform the designs of technologies. The methods that
made up this particular design ethnography included participant observation,
in the form of both transit-use and ride-alongs with participants, semistructured
group interviews, and video diaries. I chose these methods in order to explore the
experiences that transit dependent riders faced and discover the strategies they
used to overcome challenges. To engage participants in a way that provided them
with a sense of agency and influence over the research process, I asked participants
to choose where they would like the research to take place (Agboka, 2014). As a
result, the study took place in a variety of disparate settings that included partici-
pants’ homes, community centers, coffee shops, buses, and a food court at a mall.
The research protocol for this study was reviewed and approved by the insti-
tutional review board at the University of Washington, including the methods,
recruiting strategies, instruments, and informed consent procedures. As the
study’s lead researcher, I conducted the informed consent procedures for each
434 Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 46(4)
of the multiple research activities. In Summer 2010, participants were recruited
by posting flyers in transit and community centers around the city of Seattle,
Washington, in the United States. Participants were screened based on criteria
related to their access to transit; specifically, they had to use public transporta-
tion as their primary mode of transportation and not own a private vehicle.
Because the study was interested in the social experience of transit riders, par-
ticipants were asked to bring others in their social network to the research
activities. In total, six groups of people participated in the study. This article
details specific findings from two groups that included people who were home-
less; other findings from the broader study are described elsewhere (Rose &
Racadio, 2012; Rose, 2011). Here, I want to focus specifically on findings related
to the participants who were contending with the intersecting constraints of
transportation and housing. While the recruiting protocol was not specifically
designed to reach these populations, two of the five groups who participated in
the study were either homeless or living in transitional housing. These circum-
stances were not evident in the screening process, as we had no question that
asked about living situations. It was not until the research interviews were
underway that these details came to light. Nevertheless, including the diverse
perspectives of these participants in the study gave it greater depth.
Group 1 consisted of two men living in transitional housing, commonly
known as a halfway house (this is temporary housing for groups of people
who are transitioning from either rehabilitation programs or incarceration to
other living situations). Group 2 was a socially connected group of five people:
four men and one woman. The five of them were connected through the experi-
ence of being homeless in Seattle. Each group took part in a semistructured
interview in which they were asked questions (both as a group and also indi-
vidually) about their experience with transit, their use of technology, and their
ideas for improving transit. The interviews lasted between 1½ and 2 hours, and
participants were compensated with a $20 gift card. As a follow-up activity, one
participant from Group 1 met with the researcher several more times. This
included taking part in a ride-along: The researcher and the participant rode
the bus together to discuss the daily experience. In addition, this same partici-
pant took part in a follow-up video-diary study, which was designed to capture
the day-in-the-life experience of riding transit. The participant was given a digi-
tal video camera (valued at approximately $100) to record his observations and
was given the camera as an honorarium. The use of video diaries was intended to
allow the research participant to guide the research process. This technique was
a modification of the Photovoice method (Wang & Burris, 1997). Participants
were given open-ended prompts: for example, What decisions did you make today
about transportation? What was the experience of taking transportation to get
somewhere like for you? and What impact did your transportation have on your
day? As in Agboka’s (2014) work on decolonizing methods, the goal of selecting
open prompts was to encourage participants to share what was of greatest
Rose 435
interest to them, rather than have the research team narrowly define the research
questions and scope.
The interview data were the primary source data for the research study.
Interview questions included details about car ownership, transit use, and tech-
nology use. In addition, the interviews focused on strategies that participants
used when public transportation was challenging or did not get them to where
they needed to go on time. Following standard qualitative research coding tech-
niques (Coffey & Atkinson, 1996), I along with a research team coded the inter-
view data with the web-based qualitative coding tool Saturate (n.d.). To
establish consensus in coding the data, multiple researchers reviewed and
coded each transcript, with a minimum of two and a maximum of five reviewers
per transcript. The team generated codes and applied them in a consistent
manner. When there was disagreement, the team discussed the code as a
group and negotiated in order to achieve consensus. The team also coded
(as secondary data) the data resulting from the participatory activities of the
video diaries. Analyzed according to the emergent themes from the interview
data, these sources helped to triangulate the research findings.
Findings
The results of the design ethnography identified a variety of practices and activ-
ities that highlighted a variety of design opportunities for people living with
resource constraints related to housing and transportation. In the next two
sections, I discuss the findings and implications for the design of policies and
systems that impact this population.
Refuge and escape: A sense of being private in public . For the group of homeless
participants in our study, being on the bus was an opportunity to enjoy private
time and space in their lives, which at most other times are lived in the public
sphere. Transit provides a refuge, which includes a sense of privacy and autonomy
while in public. People who are homeless spend much of their time within the
downtown core where there is a concentration of social services. They are also,
due to their activities and appearance, often marked as homeless and asked not to
loiter in public places. Our participants talked about the activity of riding the bus
as being an equalizing one. Once on the bus, the homeless person is just another
rider engaged in the legitimate and sanctioned purpose of moving around the city.
There is a lot of chaos downtown. There’s chaos on buses too, but on buses, I don’t
have people coming up to me asking to buy dope or drinking. I can listen to my CD
player and just ride the bus.—Ryan1
Instead of seeing transit’s function as purely instrumental and focused on effi-
ciency, this finding broadened the perspective. Transportation is crucial for
436 Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 46(4)
people who are homeless because it offers an important, albeit brief, respite from
the anxiety and stress of living on the streets. Relatedly, bus riders told stories of
using public transportation like a cheap vacation—for example, taking a route
that showed off a particularly picturesque part of the city or taking a new route
just to see where it went.
Saving and stretching money: Extreme measures, expertise, and fare evasion. When
people live in poverty, they often do not have money for public transportation,
or they have to prioritize other needs ahead of the cost of transportation. When
a bus rider misestimates the cost or policies associated with transit, the results
can be an inconvenience (at a minimum), an embarrassment, or a cause of stress.
For example, Tim had a situation in which he did not understand that different
transit agencies have different polices regarding providing transfers.
Metro buses, they take transfers, but Sound Transit doesn’t take transfers any-
more. You have to have cash. You want people to board the bus and ride it, why
don’t you allow the transfer? I was down in Auburn, and they said, “We don’t take
transfers.” I spent my last two dollars to board my bus, and I had to call my
daughter to pick me up, because I couldn’t get there from here.—Tim
To manage their limited resources, participants adopted strategies to save money
on transit, both in sanctioned and unsanctioned ways. In sanctioned ways, the
people in our study would become experts in the ways the systems worked. At
the time of the study, there was a free ride zone that covered most of Downtown
Seattle. The homeless group in particular knew the contours of this zone well
and made use of it to save on having to pay (for example, by taking the bus
to the edge of the free ride zone and then walking further to get to their
destinations).
We also heard stories from participants who engaged in what transit agencies
call fare evasion, broadly defined as the act of not paying. However, in the data
from the study, the practices of fare evasion were socially embedded, accepted,
and enacted in various ways. Some riders admitted to using Seattle’s Free Ride
Area as a way to get around paying. They might start a ride in the free zone and
then, when it was time to pay, get off without paying. More commonly, we heard
of the ways in which riders appealed to the kindness and sympathy of drivers.
All of the riders in the homeless and transitional housing groups talked about
the ways in which they had asked bus drivers for permission to ride without
paying.
I had a little job in Tacoma. The prices were different; I didn’t have enough money.
It was one of those busses that takes you to Tacoma—different line. The price is
different, and the guy let me go, so I asked for a transfer, he said no, I couldn’t. He
let me ride, but no transfer.—Shawn
Rose 437
I have drivers tell me to put in what I have. I have a lot of that. I don’t have the
fare, but I need to get there, so they say, “Put in what you have.”—Louis
I would say that nine times out of 10, [the bus drivers] let you on and tell you, “Just
put in what you have.”—Cynthia
When I get on, I talk to them. I let them know [that I don’t have the fare]. Some are
mean, and some aren’t—it depends on the driver. Some don’t want to; some say
ok.—Louis
Maybe a bit more consideration. I know that the system is not a charitable organ-
ization, but if someone just started a job, and they don’t have bus money, I’m not
asking to ride for free all the time. Be considerate of a person’s situation.—Eddy
Other cost-saving strategies included taking cheaper routes or riding during off
peak times, which allowed them to save $0.25 per ride, or walking further to pay
less for the cost of an entire journey. Several of the riders in the homeless group
leveraged charitable organizations to get support to pay for transportation.
These examples demonstrate several points that are germane to the
conversations related to social justice and design. First, members of this vulner-
able population have deep expertise when it comes to using the resource of
transportation. The expertise is community based and socially embedded, just
as expertise is in many of the workplace systems we study in technical commu-
nication. Using Spinuzzi and Zachry’s notion of genre ecologies, we can see how
the people in our study used their expertise with genres (transfer tickets) and
relationships (bus drivers) to attempt to achieve their goals. In this way, the
transit informational ecosystem is an open system, accommodating activities
that were not intentionally designed, but rather enacted by an individual’s
knowledge. We learned that the use of transfer tickets was a socially embedded
practice within particular communities. Learning to use transfers to gain an
extra or extended ride was something that everyone just did, particularly in
poor communities.
There was a great deal of expertise embedded in these practices to gain
cheaper or free rides. Bringing this notion of expertise to light, however, may
involve its own challenges and tensions: By highlighting unsanctioned practices
of an already vulnerable population, the researcher could put this population at
risk. At the time of the study, the transit system was moving towards phasing
out the free ride zone and continues to consider phasing out paper transfer
tickets. So, is it ethical to expose the practices of the study’s participants, even
though they are commonplace among people within these communities? By
casting this population as expert and vulnerable, however, we can highlight
the ways in which their knowledge can contribute to system improvements over-
all. How can these considerations be included in user or design requirements for
438 Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 46(4)
new systems and policies? Knowing that poor bus riders maximize small
amounts of money, how can transit policies and fares take into account micro
transactions to aid these riders? For example, is it possible to support micro-
transactions and provide for additional time on a transfer ticket for a small
amount of money?
Constraints related to relying on public transit. In addition to policies related to fares,
the bus schedule structures and limits people’s ability to access other resources,
such as employment. Several riders told stories of how the bus impacted their job
prospects. One rider, for example, rode his bike 30 miles to work because no bus
accommodated his early-morning shift at a fisheries’ plant. He mentioned that
this commute was one of the reasons his employment at the plant ended. Others
mentioned losing jobs because a bus was running late and their employer would
not give them a second chance, probably due to the low-skill jobs some of the
people in our study had.
For the jobs that I have, I end up working in the evening and get off late at night.
At the time, I was living (in a suburban area far from the city). I got off at 11:00,
and I look at the schedule, and the bus stops running at 10:30. I would have to go
all the way downtown to get an express bus at night. I’d have to wait an hour or
two downtown, then take the express bus takes me to (another suburb). It would be
so late that I’d miss the last bus up east hill and have to walk up a hill late at night.
This was every night for three years. It was rainy and cold; it was a struggle. That’s
a mile uphill.—Shawn
We heard a variety of stories of participants walking or biking extreme distances
to work—often late in the night or early in the morning—due to the lack of
available service. These stories from participants demonstrate persistence and
perseverance on the part of riders. At first blush, it may be unclear how these
stories connect to the larger issue of advocacy for public transportation.
However, a similar situation recently came to light in Detroit, and the story
was picked up on social media. James Robertson, nicknamed Walking Man,
walked to work 21 miles each day round trip, due to the lack of access to public
transportation (Laitner, n.d.). This story puts a human face on a challenge
encountered by many of the working poor. It has spawned not only an online
giving campaign that has garnered over $350,000 and a car to be donated to
Robertson, but it has also prompted a variety of conversations and debates over
the lack of funding for public transportation. This is not to claim that our
research examples can or should turn into newspaper stories, but it illustrates
that putting a human face on a universal problem can help the community and
policy makers see an issue in a different light.
The examples presented here illustrate that the vulnerable populations in our
study, like any riders, are impacted by costs, schedules, and lack of predictability
Rose 439
in bus service. But it also demonstrates the impact of these issues: What for some
may be an inconvenience, for others could be devastating—the difference
between keeping and losing a job, choosing between eating and paying for
bus fare, or trying to stretch the limited amount of resources one has by
taking risks to evade fares.
Implications for Policy and Design
The previous section highlights some of the experiences of the people who took
part in our study. Using their stories as a starting point, I now present a series of
reflections on changes to policies and technologies that potentially harm or
neglect this population.
No More Free Rides
From 1973 to 2012, King County Metro Transit, the transit authority operating
buses in the Seattle area, operated a Ride Free Area (RFA, n.d.) in the city of
Seattle. The initial impetus for the RFA was both to support quick loading and
unloading of buses, and to support local retailers in the downtown core. Due to
increasing budget constraints that coincided with the recession and concerns
about fare evasion, the free ride zone was eliminated by the King County
Council. King County Metro estimated that they were losing up to $3.4 million
annually, or 2.4% of total revenue, due to fare evasion (King County
Washington, 2010). King County did extensive outreach to the public to under-
stand concerns and strategies for ending the RFA. This consisted of a public
comment period, the results of which appeared in a public engagement report
(King County Metro Transit, 2012). The report specifically focused on public
outreach and acknowledged that the plan had to reach “people with little or no
income who have historically used the RFA to travel to essential services.”
It therefore included a plan for instituting a new free service for those who
could not afford bus fare. This service, called the circulator route, was imple-
mented and is operated by the nonprofit organization Solid Ground. The bus on
this route is free and makes various stops at medical facilities, food banks,
missions, and shelters. While this circulator bus provides free limited transpor-
tation to people in need, it does not allow them to “blend in” and find refuge on
public transportation as they formerly could. For participants in our study, tran-
sit served many purposes; it was not just a way to get from point A to point B.
Now that even a short ride across town costs $2.50 at peak fare, their small
opportunity for dignity is missing. Moreover, the circulator bus exacerbates the
stigma—the bus looks different and has its own stop, which marks its riders as
different: homeless, poor, and in need. The circulator bus was proposed as a way
to offset the lack of the RFA, but could another solution have worked as well?
Would a different design or policy solution meet the needs both of the transit
agency, which could no longer provide free bus service downtown, and of the
vulnerable populations who valued their positions on the bus, its legitimizing
function, and the sense of privacy, belonging, and normalcy it provided?
440 Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 46(4)
Digitizing Fare Payment and Lack of Visibility of System Status
Over the past several years, the transit agencies in the Puget Sound region have
been transitioning to a smart card system known as the ORCA (One Regional
Card for All). The ORCA system represents a growing trend among many urban
transit systems. Transit agencies see a variety of benefits associated with the
implementation of smart card systems: They are purported to speed up routes
and maintain schedules by making fare collection quicker; they provide more
insight and administrative ease to allow more visibility in routes and usage; and
they are supposed to help combat fare evasion. How these systems are designed
and implemented, however, has impacts and ramifications for riders, particu-
larly for those who are vulnerable. For example, eliminating paper transfers is
significant because of the ways in which the paper transfers help riders structure
their time around leveraging a free return trip. Going digital removes some of
the affordances of the paper system.
We do not have insight into the deliberations, choices, and tradeoffs of the
creators of the ORCA smart card system during their design process. We can see
only the end result. But by examining the result, we can see how a switch to a
digitized system has removed or deprioritized features that were valuable for the
vulnerable populations in this study. Thinking about the needs of low-income
riders, such as the homeless and the transit dependent, brings a different set of
values and design considerations into play. Such considerations could prompt
different design decisions to support these audiences. For example, if the home-
less populations’ needs and values were to be considered, design requirements
for the ORCA system would include a way to reveal how much time riders have
left on a transfer, either via the card reader or by sending a SMS/text message to
a mobile phone. Another possible design requirement would be to allow riders to
purchase incremental add-ons to their rides, such as including the option to
extend a transfer window for a small amount of time for a modest sum.
LeDantec and Edwards (2008) noted the consequences when technologies do
not work in these payment systems: “ ...it is not just the usability problems in
the technology that affect homeless persons; the social stigma of being perceived
as the homeless person without bus fare is a far more visceral consequence of a
poorly designed technology” (p. 633).
Human-Centered Design With an
Advocacy Perspective
The previous two sections showed how focusing on vulnerable populations can
provide an alternative vantage point for the design of information and commu-
nication technologies. In this section, I conclude by reflecting on what a social
justice perspective, with a focus on advocacy, can offer to researchers and prac-
titioners in technical communication who are engaged in human-centered design
projects. As the scope of our work continues to broaden into a variety of design
contexts, simply focusing on usability or even user-centered design is not ade-
quate. Regardless of good intentions, if we fail to take into account the needs of
Rose 441
vulnerable populations, we are in danger of creating technologies that reinforce
existing inequities. I do not mean to assert that our field is solely responsible for
this perspective. Nevertheless, as the field of user-centered design and, more
broadly, user experience continues to gain traction, we have a unique opportun-
ity to advocate for inclusion of a social justice perspective in design conversa-
tions with developers, organizations, and policymakers.
Within this space, it is possible to consider how engaging in human-centered
design can provide an opportunity for advocacy. Regarding qualitative research
more broadly, Creswell (2003) refers to an advocacy perspective as one that
starts by acknowledging a position of inequality or alienation and attempts to
address that inequity. Taking an advocacy perspective in design could be bene-
ficial for the design process, regardless of its context, but is particularly crucial
for systems and policies (such as those relating to e-government, healthcare,
public transportation, and civic design, to name a few) that are designed for a
broad swath of users.
First, it is crucial to identify vulnerable populations that are potentially
impacted by a design and ensure that members of that population participate
in the design process. Oftentimes, technical communicators represent the voice
of the user on a development team. In most projects, we start with a consider-
ation of user or audience needs: During this phase, we identify the target users
and audiences. It is at this time that we should ask, Who might we be leaving
out? What vulnerable populations are currently using the system? Do they have
competing needs? Saving space in the conversation for a different set of users can
help us to consider different design needs and prioritize different features.
What if we devoted at least one design persona (Cooper, 1999) to represent a
vulnerable population?
Second, how do we privilege different kinds of expertise in the systems we are
designing and documenting? While technical communication has a long history
of working with experts, when we think of experts, we often do not think of
vulnerable populations. However, the ways in which people with limited
resources make do with what they have can reveal how systems are currently
being used. How do we respect, leverage, and support their expertise as we
design information and communication technologies?
Third, regarding the choice of methods, what are appropriate and ethical ways
to undertake research involving vulnerable groups? In what ways do our methods
provide insights for these audiences? We see a shift from the main methods in user-
centered design, such as usability testing and its focus on finding problems in the
interface, to a human-centered design approach, which focuses on gaining deeper
understanding of the problems in people’s lives and thinking of the ways that
technologies may solve or exacerbate them. Agboka’s (2013, 2014) decolonialized
methodologies provide guidance regarding not just what sites we, as technical
communication researchers, ought to research (in his case, intercultural), but how
we need to reflect and actively interrogate our own research practices—including
ways that we can be more reflexive in our choice of methods and positioning in the
research project, and humbler in our interactions with participants. The method
of Photovoice, which is common to healthcare and educational research, but less
442 Journal of Technical Writing and Communication 46(4)
so in our fields, also offers promise due to its role in casting the participant in the
role of the researcher (Wang & Burris, 1997). Finally, providing a clearer inves-
tigation of values and unintended consequences in the design process can help
safeguard against purely functional solutions that may foreclose or constrain
agency among vulnerable populations. The value-sensitive design approach
provides a toolkit of methods and approaches that can guide the way in this
recommendation (Friedman et al., 2006).
To participate in public deliberation, citizens must engage in sophisticated
rhetorical strategies (Simmons & Grabill, 2007). The spaces in which public
deliberation takes place often continue to exclude the marginalized and vul-
nerable. How can technical communication practitioners and scholars work
with advocacy organizations to help uncover and communicate the needs of
these populations in a way that can be included or heard in larger civic
conversations?
Finally, for researchers in technical communication and design, the construct
of resource-constraints can be a helpful and productive entre ́ e into spaces where
vulnerable populations may be impacted. By starting with a resource, such as
transportation or housing, as the study above demonstrates, we come to see
design needs in a different light. Starting with constraints helps identify poten-
tially vulnerable users and populations within the informational ecosystem and
provides for a way to investigate how these constraints impact use and therefore
can provide inspiration for design.
In conclusion, while technologies have the potential to intervene in a positive
way, we need to consider how they are designed and how the design impacts
people in need. By focusing on vulnerable populations and understanding their
unique perspectives, we can help create more equitable access to services and
systems. In this article, my aim was to contribute to the growing interest in social
justice, in our research and pedagogy. Human-centered design as an approach
has the potential to enlarge the scope of what we pay attention to when design-
ing information, services, and systems. However, to consider users and their
needs alone is not enough. Instead, taking a principled stance to understand
the lives, needs, and values of vulnerable populations requires technical commu-
nicators and designers to ask different questions and therefore has the potential
to bring about different, and more equitable, design solutions.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publica-
tion of this article.
Note
1. All participant names are pseudonyms. The quotes have been transcribed from
participant interviews. Some have been edited slightly for clarity.